## Data Mining

The goal of this project is to develop effective and computationally efficient
algorithms for analyzing large volumes of data. The ultimate purpose of these
analyses is to discover key and actionable information and gain insights about the
underlying processes/systems that created the data (or are being described by the
data).

This emerging discipline is becoming increasingly important as advances in data
collection have led to the explosive growth in the amount of available data. Data
mining algorithms are used extensively to analyze business, commerce, scientific,
engineering, and security data and dramatically improve the effectiveness of
applications in areas such as marketing, predictive modeling, life sciences,
information retrieval, and engineering.

Our research was initially focused on developing high-performance scalable parallel
algorithms for solving core data mining problems but in recent years, it has expanded
to include research on fundamental data mining algorithms in the areas of data
clustering, classification, pattern discovery, sequence mining, graph mining, and its
applications in information retrieval, collaborative filtering, and bioinformatics.

Our latest research is focusing on the following areas:

* Algorithms for finding meaningful clusters in large sparse graphs like those arising
in relational/social networks and the web.

* Large-margin and kernel-based classification algorithms with an emphasis towards
algorithms that can learn arbitrary output spaces.

* Algorithms that can mine large and complex graphs.

The research over the years has been funded by a number of Federal agencies including
ARL, NSF, and NIH.


### Software

Many of the algorithms that we developed have been made available to the public in
the form of stand-alone programs and libraries that are used extensively in many
academic, government, and industrial sites. This includes the CLUTO clustering
toolkit that implements different classes of feature- and similarity-based clustering
algorithms, the SUGGEST and SLIM libraries of scalable collaborative-filtering based
recommendation algorithms, and the PAFI pattern finding toolkit that contains various
algorithms to find frequent patterns in transaction, sequence, and graph databases.

All of these tools are available for download from our Software page.


